Platform options (#998)
AvaloniaUI/avalonia-docs: docs/platform-specific-guides/windows.md

Avalonia uses the Win32 API directly on Windows. No additional workloads or dependencies are needed beyond the .NET SDK. Your target framework is simply `net9.0` or `net10.0`, not a platform-specific one.

Rendering uses Skia on top of Direct3D 11, reached through the ANGLE translation layer (the default `AngleEgl` mode described in [Configuring Win32 platform options](#configuring-win32-platform-options)), with an automatic software fallback when GPU acceleration is unavailable (for example, in remote desktop sessions or virtual machines without GPU passthrough). Input, windowing, clipboard, file dialogs, drag-and-drop, and accessibility are all provided through standard Win32 APIs.

Because there is no dependency on a Windows-specific .NET workload, you can cross-compile Windows builds from macOS or Linux. The resulting binary runs on any supported version of Windows with the .NET runtime installed.

## Configuring Win32 platform options

> `Win32PlatformOptions` controls how Avalonia renders, composites, and scales on Windows. Pass an instance to `.With()` when you build the application in `Program.cs`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Win32PlatformOptions` controls how Avalonia renders, composites, and scales on Windows. Apply it by passing to `.With()` in the `AppBuilder` in `Program.cs`:
```

```csharp
AppBuilder.Configure<App>()
    .UsePlatformDetect()
    .With(new Win32PlatformOptions
    {
        RenderingMode = new[]
        {
            Win32RenderingMode.AngleEgl,
            Win32RenderingMode.Software
        },
        CompositionMode = new[]
        {
            Win32CompositionMode.WinUIComposition,
            Win32CompositionMode.RedirectionSurface
        },
        DpiAwareness = Win32DpiAwareness.PerMonitorDpiAware
    });
```

> Every option has a default, so set only the ones you need to change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following options are available.

- [Rendering mode](#rendering-mode)
- [Composition mode](#composition-mode)
- [DPI awareness](#dpi-awareness)
- [Other options](#other-options)
```

### Rendering mode

> `RenderingMode` is an ordered list of graphics backends. Avalonia tries each one in turn and uses the first that initializes successfully, so the first entry has the highest priority. The default is `AngleEgl`, then `Software`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`RenderingMode` is an ordered list of graphics backends. Avalonia tries each one in turn and uses the first that initializes successfully, so the first entry has the highest priority. The default is a two-item list of `AngleEgl` first, `Software` second.
```

| Mode | Description |
|---|---|

> | `AngleEgl` | GPU rendering through ANGLE EGL. The default GPU backend. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `AngleEgl` | GPU rendering through ANGLE EGL. Default GPU backend. |
```

| `Wgl` | GPU rendering through native Windows OpenGL. |
| `Vulkan` | GPU rendering through native Windows Vulkan. |
| `Software` | CPU rendering into a framebuffer. |

> ANGLE (Almost Native Graphics Layer Engine) translates the OpenGL ES calls that Skia produces into Direct3D 11 on Windows. This is why `AngleEgl` is the default GPU backend, and why it is the mode the `WinUIComposition` and `DirectComposition` modes below depend on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ANGLE (Almost Native Graphics Layer Engine) translates the OpenGL ES calls that Skia produces into Direct3D 11 on Windows. This is why `AngleEgl` is the default GPU backend, and why it is the mode that [`WinUIComposition` and `DirectComposition`](#composition-mode) depend on.
```

> To support the widest range of devices, including remote desktop sessions and virtual machines without a GPU, include `Software` as a fallback. If none of the listed modes initialize, Avalonia throws an `InvalidOperationException`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To support the widest range of devices, including remote desktop sessions and virtual machines without a GPU, include `Software` as a fallback.

`RenderingMode` must contain at least one mode. If it is empty, or none of the listed modes initialize, Avalonia throws an `InvalidOperationException`.
```

### Composition mode

> `CompositionMode` is an ordered list of window composition backends, tried in priority order like `RenderingMode`. The default is `WinUIComposition`, `DirectComposition`, then `RedirectionSurface`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`CompositionMode` is an ordered list of window composition backends, tried in priority order like [`RenderingMode`](#rendering-mode). The default is a three-item list of `WinUIComposition` first, `DirectComposition` second, `RedirectionSurface` third.
```

> | Mode | Requirements and behavior |
> |---|---|
> | `WinUIComposition` | Windows 10 build 17134 and above. Supports acrylic effects and high refresh rate rendering. Requires `RenderingMode` to include `AngleEgl`. |
> | `DirectComposition` | Windows 8 and above. Requires `RenderingMode` to include `AngleEgl`. |
> | `LowLatencyDxgiSwapChain` | Feature Level 11_3, Windows 8.1 and above. Renders through a low-latency DXGI swap chain for reduced input latency, without the transparency and blur of `WinUIComposition`. Requires `RenderingMode` to include `AngleEgl`. |
> | `RedirectionSurface` | Compatibility fallback for older systems. Some Avalonia features may not work. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Mode | Requirements | Behavior |
|---|---|---|
| `WinUIComposition` | Windows 10 build 17134 and above. [`RenderingMode`](#rendering-mode) must include `AngleEgl`. | Supports acrylic effects and high refresh rate rendering. |
| `DirectComposition` | Windows 8 and above. [`RenderingMode`](#rendering-mode) must include `AngleEgl`. | |
| `LowLatencyDxgiSwapChain` | Feature Level 11_3, Windows 8.1 and above. [`RenderingMode`](#rendering-mode) must include `AngleEgl`. | Renders through a low-latency DXGI swap chain for reduced input latency, without the transparency and blur of `WinUIComposition`. |
| `RedirectionSurface` | | Compatibility fallback for older systems. Some Avalonia features may not work. |
```

> Include `RedirectionSurface` as a fallback to support the widest range of devices. If none of the listed modes apply, Avalonia throws an `InvalidOperationException`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To support the widest range of devices, include `RedirectionSurface` as a fallback.

If none of the listed modes apply, Avalonia throws an `InvalidOperationException`.
```

> For how rendering and composition fit together, see [Application Architecture](/docs/fundamentals/architecture#the-rendering-pipeline).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on how rendering and composition fit together, see [Application architecture](/docs/fundamentals/architecture#the-rendering-pipeline).
```

### DPI awareness

`DpiAwareness` sets how the application responds to display scaling. The default is `PerMonitorDpiAware`.

| Value | Behavior |
|---|---|
| `PerMonitorDpiAware` | Adjusts the scale factor whenever DPI changes, such as when a window moves between monitors. |
| `SystemDpiAware` | Queries DPI once at startup and does not adjust to later changes. |

> | `Unaware` | The application is DPI unaware, and the system bitmap-scales it. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `Unaware` | The application is DPI-unaware. The system bitmap-scales it. |
```

> See [High DPI and per-monitor scaling](#high-dpi-and-per-monitor-scaling) for how scaling affects layout and assets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [High DPI and per-monitor scaling](#high-dpi-and-per-monitor-scaling) for more information on how scaling affects layout and assets.
```

## High DPI and per-monitor scaling

> Avalonia is per-monitor DPI-aware by default on Windows. Each monitor reports its own scaling factor, and Avalonia adjusts layout and rendering automatically as windows move between displays. To change this behavior, set the [`DpiAwareness` option](#dpi-awareness).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Avalonia is per-monitor DPI-aware by default on Windows. Each monitor reports its own scaling factor, and Avalonia adjusts layout and rendering automatically as windows move between displays. To change this behavior, set the [`DpiAwareness`](#dpi-awareness).
```
